
centercenterSubmitted By: Mihir LadSubmitted To: Mr. RustjaSubmitted On: Friday, May 11, 2018
White/Black Hat Hacking
Computer Ethics Assignment
8820090900Submitted By: Mihir LadSubmitted To: Mr. RustjaSubmitted On: Friday, May 11, 2018
White/Black Hat Hacking
Computer Ethics Assignment


Not too long ago, if you heard the word “hacking”, you would think about some poor guy getting their leg chopped off. With the advent of computers, the word has taken on a new meaning: exploiting weaknesses within a computer system to gain access in an unauthorized manner. As Jon Erickson puts it “Hacking: the art of exploitation.” It truly is an art. It takes an incredible amount of creativity, technical skills, and problem-solving skills to break into a computer system. However, like every new technological advancement, the question of ethics is once again brought up. When is it okay to hack a computer? Is it okay to hack a multi-million-dollar company? What about hacking a government agency that is hiding things from us? Many questions have been raised, but the debate is nonetheless a controversial one. The answer is: it depends. The ethics of hacking are dependent upon the intent and the outcome.
Black-hat hacking is the term coined to describe hackers with a malicious intent. They are the ones you hear about on the news for hacking into banks or the ones that cause harm to society. Black-hat hackers typically want nothing more than to benefit themselves and hack computers without permission. Black-hat hackers have a variety of motives from money to just plain entertainment and passion. These types of hackers break clear laws and often are viewed as criminals. They hack to steal passwords, intellectual property, account passwords, credit card numbers, and anything else that could violate your privacy. When it comes to ethics, there is no doubt, that black-hat hackers are immoral and at the bottom of the line when it comes to ethical hacking. There is no reasonable ethical framework out there where actions with bad intentions and harmful consequences such as hacking are classified as moral.
Now, there are also grey-hat hackers. As you may imagine, these hackers lie in the fuzzy area and are highly controversial when it comes to ethics. Ever heard of Edward Snowden? Snowden was a former NSA contractor who revealed documents on the US intelligence’s mass surveillance programs which were operating outside the limits of the constitution. Many praised Snowden for revealing the truth to the American people, however, the US government strongly wants to imprison Snowden under the Espionage Act. Snowden fled to Russia to seek Asylum. Although illegal, his actions are still inspiring many to this day. Some could say that Snowden did the moral thing by exposing the US government for illegal surveillance, but some don’t classify him as a hero or a villain, but rather something in between. 
What really differentiates grey-hat hackers from black-hat hackers is the intentions. Edward Snowden committed a crime but did so for the people, not for himself. In this situation, a black-hat hacker would have stolen the documents and tried to blackmail the US government, but a grey-hat hacker wouldn’t steal these documents for himself but in the name of the American people. Grey-hat hackers lie in the middle of the line when it comes to ethical hacking. What they do is not completely immoral or completely moral, but something on the edge of the two.
Not all grey-hat hackers are purely criminal. There exist some grey-hat hackers that hack corporations and organizations in their spare time for fun but notify the company if they find a security vulnerability, so the company can fix it before more of the sinister hackers find it. Since they don’t initially have permission from the company before they attempt to hack it, they are technically criminals. Imagine actually cheating for an exam using a loophole that you see in your teacher’s exam setup to demonstrate the flaw for your teacher. Sure, you would help your teacher prevent future cheating using that loophole, but in the process, you also cheated. It’s not highly immoral, but not completely innocent either.
Among this grey-area, there is another type of grey-hat hacker. These are people who find security holes and vulnerabilities in systems and then sell this information to government agencies who presumably would use it for the greater good. However, considering this in light of the NSA PRISM situation, it’s not too far-fetched to believe that the government may use it to fulfill their own hidden agenda that borders the constitution or possibly even lies outside of it. For example, there are some governments that use viruses to spy on political enemies. Some believe this to be highly immoral as selling loopholes puts the public’s privacy at risk. It can be even more dangerous when the vulnerability is for an organization like Equifax which was breached in 2017 causing millions of driver’s licenses, social security numbers, and phone numbers to be stolen.
There are also some grey-hat hackers motivated by political reasons. Hacktivism is a term defined by the use of hacking to push a political agenda. This is also a grey area in some cases. Some believe in the freedom of information, that a price tag should not be associated with information. These political hacktivists promote illegal activities such as piracy not for self-gain, but in the name of their political beliefs. This is another time where the line gets blurry. Is it okay for them to infringe other’s copyright protections in the name of their political opinions? There was a case of hacktivism with the Stuxnet virus. This virus had been snuck onto Iran’s uranium enrichment programme computer systems causing the centrifuges to go out of control. The cost of developing such a virus was upwards of 10 million pounds. It was so expensive that the only plausible creator of such a virus was a country such as the United States. It was clearly the political motive to shut down Iran’s nuclear program that caused this cyber attack. Although these hackers likely developed this virus with support from their country, it still blurred the lines on ethical hacking as it resulted in the destruction of another country’s nuclear program. Who’s to say what country should be allowed such a program and what country should not?
On the far end of the spectrum lie white-hat hackers. These are people whose day jobs are hacking. They usually work as researchers or security experts in firms that try to hack their own systems before more notorious hackers can. When white-hat hackers do this, it’s often referred to as penetration testing. In other words, what they do is try to find vulnerabilities and exploits in company software or hardware that a hacker could use to break into a system. By finding these exploits, white-hat hackers can figure out a way to patch these exploits before mal-intentioned hackers find out about them. They are often hired by big companies to perform penetration testing after which they notify the company of any weaknesses in the infrastructure that potential hackers could take advantage of. There is no doubt that these hackers are the most ethical as they consensually hack systems to strengthen their security. The name white-hat hacker and ethical hacker are often used interchangeably.
The ethical issue of hacking is one that people should be concerned about. As society moves forward, technology is just going to become a larger part of daily life. With the expansion of technology will come an increase of opportunities that grey-hat and black-hat hackers can take advantage of. In an effort to keep our security, we may begin losing our privacy. Humans aren’t perfect, and so there will never be an unhackable system, only a difficult-to-hack system. Consumers may have to begin taking security measures themselves to protect their information as everything is being moved to the Cloud and the Internet. With technological advancements, everyone is slowly transitioning into a paperless-era. One hack into Google Drive, and a person could lose their birth certificate in the near future. Instead of home security systems, we will need strong anti-virus programs. Unless there are strong government regulations put on information security, the Equifax breach may happen again in the future with a different organization.
Hacking is a serious issue that affects everyone. It affects your friends, family, career, and the world you live in. With society’s growing reliance on computers and the Internet, hacking is going to have more and more of an impact on people’s daily lives. It’s no longer a trivial matter of someone stealing your password to an instant messenger service. It’s come to the point where someone across the world can hack into a system and steal your credit cards, bank account credentials, and even your identity. The Equifax Breach, for example, is going to significantly increase the chances of identity theft and fraud due to the amount of private information that has become available to hackers. Through Denial of Service Attacks, important websites such as governmental websites could be shut down for an indefinite amount of time preventing people from accessing the information they need. Viruses can cause valuable information to be stolen without the victims even knowing it. They could lose their entire savings account or even important documents. So long as people remain dependent on technology, hacking will always be a serious threat to everyone’s privacy and safety.
Reflection
I learned a lot throughout writing this essay on the ethics of hacking. I learned about the different types of hackers such as black-hat hackers, white-hat hackers, and grey-hat hackers. I also learned about how the different types of hackers are classified based on their motives and what they do with the information they gain from hacking into a system. In addition to that, I learned about how some grey-hat hackers are funded by the government to hack under political reasons. Some hackers even hack organizations just for fun but end up notifying the organization of the vulnerability and then get paid for it. This assignment really surprised me with the entire spectrum that exists for the ethics of hacking.
In terms of writing essays, I improved my ability to write essay outlines as they make writing the essay much easier. Through creating the outline, I managed to structure my essay in a much better way as to jam pack all the information I found on the topic into as concise a manner as possible. Through this outlining process, I relearned how important it is to create an outline for essays as it really helps keep the essay on topic and organized in a way where it takes the reader through a definite path to the conclusion.
Through it all, I not only improved my writing and communication skills by writing this essay, but I also learned a lot more about hacking and its ethical impact than I expected to. I feel much more aware of the seriousness of the issue and how it may become even more severe in the future due to the trend of technology evolving in today’s society. 

Bibliography
https://www.computerworld.com/article/2563526/security0/is-hacking-ethical-.htmlhttps://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2017/03/06/ethics-and-hacking-what-you-need-to-know/https://www.ukessays.com/essays/philosophy/ethical-issues-of-computer-hacking-philosophy-essay.phphttps://www.wired.com/2016/04/hacker-lexicon-white-hat-gray-hat-black-hat-hackers/http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-22837100https://www.newyorker.com/news/daily-comment/edward-snowden-is-no-herohttps://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2018/05/equifax-breach-exposed-millions-of-drivers-licenses-phone-numbers-emails/https://www.computerweekly.com/opinion/Hacktivism-Good-or-Evilhttps://www.techwalla.com/articles/how-computer-hacking-affects-our-lives