
                
Shichao Jiang
Mr. Luchak
ENG4U0 – B
January 10th, 2018
ISP Final
Among all virtues, courage is perhaps the most prominent one. No matter the situation, people will always respect and admire courage regardless of the way it is displayed. Conversely, one of the worst reproaches in the world is to be accused of lacking courage and being cowardly. The concept of courage itself is rather simple: the quality or ability to face difficulty and danger. However, how one gathers or develops courage is a very complex idea, because there are many different aspects to consider in every situation. For example, some authors believe that “Courage, like love, needs to be nourished by hope.” (Lubonja, 2004) However, Lubonja presents the idea of different kinds of hope. Most notably, the “hope of a hero” and the “hope of a victim.” He questions if the hope of a victim is an adequate foundation on which to build the courage of a hero. In other words, the author argues that victimized individuals are often unable to muster courage in the face of adversity. Because of this, hope is an important aspect of the development of courage and of the individual. Other authors, such as Rachman, argue that the situation has little or nothing to do with courage. He offers a perspective in which provocation is necessary for the development of one’s courage. Rachman presents the idea that “frightened people perform courageous acts.” (149) There is no denying that fear may spur one to do something unexpected or out of the ordinary. However, one cannot simply face their fear and expect to be courageous. In a situation where one is faced with immense fear, human instinct takes over. When this instinct for survival takes over, actions are often performed in this state without conscious thought. Even if one managed to accomplish something, it is often a secondary result and can not necessarily be called courage. For courage to be properly developed, it is crucial that one has a reason to be courageous. This can only be accomplished when a strong feeling or emotion is present, such as guilt. For example, in the novel, The Kite Runner, by Khaled Hosseini, the main character, Amir, is discontent with many of the decisions he has made during his childhood. He imagines a life where he can be free and rid of his past. He wants to be free of all the guilt that has accumulated in his life and often finds himself taking risks to do so. In this account, it can be stated that guilt motivates one to be courageous. In the remainder of the essay, we support our argument by considering the provocation of Hassan, the return of Sanaubar, and the decisive actions of Amir.
The development of courage from guilt is clearly seen when Amir reflects upon his betrayal of Hassan in the alleyway. The guilt that he feels over the incident spurs him to take action and find the courage to seek punishment and closure. No matter how hard he tries to forget, or how occupied he keeps himself with school, Amir’s mind always returns to the bloodstains in the snow. Realizing that he can no longer carry the burden, Amir decides to bring Hassan with him to a pomegranate tree and provoke him into giving him punishment, which is Amir’s way of atoning for his actions. Amir musters up the courage to risk his precious friendship in an attempt to get rid of the guilt that he feels.
I hit him with another pomegranate, in the shoulder this time. The juice splattered his face. “Hit me back!” I spat. “Hit me back, goddamn you!” I wished he would. I wished he’d give me the punishment I craved, so maybe I’d finally sleep at night. Maybe then things could return to how they used to be between us. But Hassan did nothing as I pelted him again and again. “You’re a coward!” I said. “Nothing but a goddamn coward!” (Hosseini, 50)
Amir “wishes” to free himself of the anxiety and guilt that he is riddled with. The overwhelming guilt that Amir feels over the incident in the alleyway is a clear catalyst for him to finally find the courage to confront Hassan and to find closure. He assaults Hassan with pomegranates, hoping that “he’d give [him] the punishment [he] craved” and fight back. He emphasizes his feelings and shows just how much he was suffering by saying that “[he’d] finally sleep at night.” His desire to reconcile and to atone for his actions is made clear when he wishes that “things could return to how they used to be.” By taking action and by risking his precious friendship, Amir demonstrates his newfound courage, spurred by the guilt he felt over his actions.
This can also be observed from the actions of Sanaubar. After abandoning her son and husband several decades ago, she sets out to find Hassan. This decision is one that requires a substantial amount of courage. Her ability to do so is a result of the guilt that she has accumulated over the time that she has been away. In the past, she was a notoriously unscrupulous woman who lived up to her dishonorable reputation. Sanaubar had eloped with a band of singers and dancers, right after giving birth to Hassan. She also mocked and taunted Ali, her husband and Hassan’s father. She made it clear that she had disdain for Ali’s appearance.
Her good eye rolled to him. “I have walked long and far to see if you are as beautiful in the flesh as you are in my dreams. And you are. Even more.” She pulled his hand to her scarred face. “Smile for me. Please.” Hassan did and the old woman wept. “You smiled coming out of me, did anyone ever tell you? And I wouldn’t even hold you. Allah, forgive me, I wouldn’t even hold you.” (Hosseini, 114)
These “dreams” refer to the images of her son, Hassan, that she has envisioned while she was still missing. They are a result of her reflecting on the choices she made in the past, namely her leaving Hassan. Despite being an old and frail woman, she “walked long and far to see if [Hassan] is as beautiful in the flesh as [he] is in [her] dreams.” By risking her life in this process, it shows that she laments abandoning her son and longs to restore their relationship. She also tells him that “[she] wouldn’t even hold [him],” further proving that she has reflected on her decision and regrets leaving. She was filled with so much remorse and repents, saying, “Allah, forgive me.” Her willingness to risk her own life and apologize to her son is best interpreted as the courage Sanaubar has developed as a result of her guilt.
Again, Amir shows his development of courage after visiting one of his old acquaintances, Rahim Khan. He decides to grant his wish and find Hassan’s son. This decision was made possible because of the courage he musters from his guilt-ridden mind. When Amir was 13 years old, he framed Hassan for stealing items from his family. Due to this accusation, Hassan’s father, Ali, decided that they would leave the household and no longer work for them. After their departure, both end up dying in a horrible manner, and Amir feels that things may have ended up differently for them if they had not left. He knows that they only left because of what he did, so he takes this as an opportunity to demonstrate courage and atone for his actions.
This one’s cab was filled with something and I suddenly understood the purpose of those two holes behind the goalposts. They unloaded the third truck. The crowd murmured in anticipation. “Do you want to stay?” Farid said gravely. “No,” I said. I had never in my life wanted to be away from a place as badly as I did now. “But we have to stay.” (Hosseini, 146)
It is clear that Amir does not want to be there, for he replies to Farad’s question with a “no” without hesitation. He further emphasizes his feelings of fear and uneasiness by saying that “[he] had never in [his] life wanted to be away from a place as badly as [he] did now.” Despite knowing that his life could easily end because of his actions, he keeps his resolve and says “[they] have to stay.” He does this because he feels it is necessary to cleanse himself of his sins. His willingness to risk his own life and save Hassan’s son is best interpreted as the courage Amir has developed as a result of his guilt. He yearns to rid himself of his sins and keep a part of Hassan living on.
Throughout this novel, there are multiple occasions where people display the ability to take risks. First of all, Amir provokes Hassan to give him punishment for his wrongdoings. Later, Sanaubar returns to Hassan’s side, attempting to mend their broken relationship. Furthermore, Amir stays resolved despite imminent danger. All of these events clearly indicate that guilt motivates one to be courageous.
Works Cited
Hosseini, Khaled. The Kite Runner. London: Bloomsbury, 2014.
Lubonja, Fatos. "Courage and the terror of death." Social Research, vol. 71, no. 1, 2004, pp. 117.
Rachman, Stanley J. "Fear and Courage: A Psychological Perspective." Social Research, vol. 71, no. 1, 2004, pp. 149.
            